I'll just do that one half.
I think I got rid of it.
Is that better?
Uh, nope.
Alright, now let's see if it's gone.
It's gone?
Yeah, it's gone.
Count to five for me please.
Oh, one, two, three, four, five.
Looks good.
Alrighty.
I get it right.
Yeah, we got it.
We got it.
Test, test, test, test.
Alright.
Alrighty.
You say that would have been too cold out there, didn't you?
What, here?
Yeah.
No, it's been very mild here.
Okay.
We, uh...
When we first arrived, we, uh...
We thought it was a little chilly, can't be...
Until we heard that Orlando had minus 29 the previous night,
and then we just feel it was a chilly.
Okay, we've got the tape recorder rolling.
Just one more time if you'd count to three for me please.
Oh, how about one, two, three?
One, two, three. Looks good.
That's the other way.
I can speak a little louder if this is faint.
Now that's pretty good.
Now we're far and beyond where we were as far as audio recording goes.
Now we do all sorts of mixing and jump with this in the studio after we get through recording it.
I have every confidence in America now.
Good.
Alright, we're gonna go ahead and get started.
Okay.
Alright. How did you get interested in writing?
I was too long ago to remember.
When I left school at, uh...
When I was 16 and wanted to be a writer then,
I guess it was, you know, something that I always enjoyed doing as a kid at school.
You know, the essays and the story writing exercises you get.
And, uh...
When I left school I told the world I was gonna be a writer.
And, you could think of a good idea until somebody said,
well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience of 16 years,
what are you gonna write about that the world is breathlessly waiting to hear?
And, uh, I hadn't thought about that and the answer was not a lot.
So I went away into engineering and electronics and computers and things like that for something like 20 years.
And I suppose the interest in writing probably never went away.
And 20 odd years later, that situation had changed a lot.
I'd spent a lot of that time.
I started off as an electronics engineer and then a computer designer
and then went into selling computer systems.
And, uh, not the blue boxes you see at work that print out payrolls and things.
I'm not talking about business computers,
but the real-time scientific systems that might go into scientific research laboratories
are connected up to instruments to collect all the data and turn them into pictures on screens.
And, uh, the sort of computers you'd find in particle accelerator installations or observatories.
In other words, all my customers were scientists, physicists, biologists, chemists and so forth.
And the kind of system we're talking about ranged up to several million dollars.
And when somebody's buying a system of that size,
it's not the kind of thing that you sell in a one-half hour sales call.
They sign the paper, you're frequently working with them for 12, maybe 18 months before a contract is finalized.
And during that time, you have to, you know, try and understand a lot of what they're doing in,
in terms of being able to put together and recommend the right sort of system for their needs.
In other words, you get to know a little bit of what they're all doing.
And I found it fascinating, a fascinating world that they lived in.
You also get to know them socially, how they think, how they take, what makes them laugh.
Very interesting as people.
And I found 20 years later that there were a lot of interesting things that he was here to write about
and form the basis of stories.
So I didn't particularly set out to be a science fiction writer.
I suppose I became one by accident.
I just always wanted to write and started writing stories about the little bit of life that I'd had some personal experience of
and was told I was a science fiction writer and I said, how's that?
And they said, well, the publisher is publishing it under their science fiction influence.
So we guess you have to be.
So I said, OK.
And it kind of started out like that.
OK. Could you hold for just a second here?
I've got to take care of a slide, flutter it in one of my machines.
OK. Hang on. I'll be right back with you.
Still here.
Oh, OK.
You've covered it along with the background already.
Oh, is there a problem?
I'm just getting a funny scraping noise off of real type.
So it's not going to be really picking up anyway.
So we'll just leave it.
Has it gone away?
No, it's sitting there just scraping away.
But the heck with it.
You've covered a lot of the background stuff, like I said.
So I'll think I will go right into some other stuff.
Associating with the scientists, as you were, I guess that gave you a lot of the background material that you use in your stories.
Yeah. Well, that provided more to trigger.
I, the stimulation to take an interest in that kind of work, I guess reading provided a lot of it.
But that kind of material is easy to read when you have a vested interest in understanding it,
because you have business relationships that will profit from that understanding.
In other words, it's reading with a purpose, a clear-cut purpose rather than just out of curiosity or a way of killing time.
So luckily it became a little more than that.
Do you usually do a lot of...
Back up here.
Most of your stories, I guess, would be called hard science fiction.
Yeah.
Do you do a lot of research whenever you do write a story?
Yeah, I do.
I suppose a lot. I read quite a lot.
And I suppose the bulk of my reading is nonfiction.
So even casual reading in a way becomes what might be termed non-specific research.
In other words, information that just gets stored away and comes out later,
although I didn't study it for any particular reason at the time.
But while I was... Before I became a full-time writer, I was still working in the computer business.
I used to... I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants, which was kind of handy.
I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other customers who were studied pieces of rock brought back from the Apollo missions
and other guys who were building in... or investigating machine intelligence.
And just about any of the topics or the favorite themes of science fiction that you could take out of a hat,
the chances were sort of not 10 to 1, I had a customer specializing in that field.
And I just had to... If I needed some background information on a particular topic,
I could almost guarantee I had a phone number in my diary as a guy who could talk all day about it.
And they loved doing it as well. I used to call them and they'd say,
I'd like to come and talk to you tomorrow. Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about?
Oh, I need some help with the book I'm working on.
Well, why didn't you say so? What times do you want to show up? And they talk all day.
And I think this is one of the interesting sides of selling computers into this kind of area.
You can imagine some of these specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever
and they end up shutting the back rooms of universities.
And maybe there are four people on the planet they can talk to who understand their language.
And sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the world outside
that has walked in off the street is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to them
and is curious and wants to know what they're doing, wants to have it explained.
And it was a very pleasant way to work a living. You not only will gain customers,
in many instances I found you gain friends as well.
It's a very, very pleasant combination to build a life around where the things you like doing,
the kind of work that you like to do, the kind of activity that you like to do
is also part of a process of making friends and not only that somebody is prepared to pay you to do it.
I found that a very pleasant situation.
Your first novel, in fact I believe it was the first thing that you wrote, was Inherit of the Stars.
Yes it was.
It's a science fiction detective story.
Yes.
How did you come to write that book?
Well, I think that sums it up pretty well.
Well it reflects I think the way I see science, which is indeed as a wonderful,
ongoing, never-ending detective story.
And I suppose I got a little bit dissatisfied with some of the depictions of science and scientists
that I'd seen in fiction.
I formed the impression or the suspicion in some cases that perhaps the people who had written
some of the fiction certainly would have perhaps not worked in a scientific field
or spoken to a scientist for a long, long time and maybe generations of people had reinforced each other's cliches.
Scientists were always eccentric and they wore odd colour shoes and they grew cabbages of eight people
and they wanted to conquer the world or something.
And there are these cute public impressions of scientists as people who run down the street with no clothes
on shouting Eureka or have you read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on
and what came to him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next twenty years.
And real science, there are insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes,
a lot of people doing nothing really dramatic or exciting but just meticulously sifting through details,
collecting information for generations and for centuries, all different parts of the world.
And it's really like putting together a huge chigsaw puzzle, lots of people cutting out pieces and twisting them round
and every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner and see that it fits with a huge chunk down there
and that's a breakthrough and so it goes on.
And it really is a detective story, I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective fiction.
And I wanted to write a story that attempted to depict it in this kind of way and hopefully would convey some of the excitement
that personally I feel when I look at this whole thing.
I believe the...
I think that, I thought that yeah let's make it a detective story but if we want a detective mystery
that is going to be sufficiently intriguing to motivate a large proportion of the scientific community as happened in Inherit the Stars,
we want something a little more original and exciting than bodies in the library or footprints in the flower bed.
So we invented Charlie and the aliens and the rest I suppose you know.
Basically it was an attempt to depict science as it is or at least as I perceive it.
And at the same time weave that into a story that people who were non-scientists, non-specialists would find stimulating and
arousing for the curiosity even if without trying to turn it into a 250 page lab report or something like that.
Yeah I believe, I don't know if I'm reading this into your work or not but some of what I'm feeling is that your writing is sort of almost a celebration of learning,
you know the learning process.
Yes, I think it's one of the most exciting processes anybody can experience.
I think it's very sad that in large sections of our culture we should have evolved the attitude that learning is something you endure until you leave school
and then it ceases with adulthood.
I think education and living are just different aspects of the same process that never ends.
In the minds of a lot of people the two teams seem to have separated out.
And for some reason learning is looked upon as hard work and unpleasant and something that you still fear of unless you kind of avoid it.
I think that's very, very sad.
No reason why it should be so I think it's just a consequence of cultural expectations.
A lot of people expect it to be hard work and tedious and sure enough it is.
In your stories I've noticed that you really flesh out the futures that you create with a lot of detail.
I lost my question.
You were talking about the future.
Let me just rephrase it here.
I notice in your stories that you really flesh them out with a lot of detail.
Does that simply just make the story more realistic?
I don't know if there's any particular purpose in doing that.
I try and use as much detail as I feel is needed to convey whatever meaning I'm trying to convey at that particular part of the book.
Some parts I got over very quickly because there's really not a lot to say.
I don't know if you have any specific examples in mind that we could talk about more particularly.
I think the short answer is I simply make descriptions etc. as detailed as I feel they need to be
to say what I want to say.
I was remembering one particular instance when a hud is traveling from England to the United States
and he opens up his briefcase and plugs in his video phone to the plane and makes this long distance call right there.
It seems so natural that it just creates a very realistic atmosphere for your story.
I like to do things like that.
I see what you mean by detail now.
I think these kinds of details do matter because if we're putting a story into a futuristic setting,
I think the little details of background such as if the guy needs to make a phone call,
how does he go about it if he needs to render CAD,
these matter because if the story is being told in the future,
the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic.
I've come across a number of instances which in my opinion are a little flawed because it's felt with an AW.
A writer may have seized on a particular thought, maybe a new scientific idea or a machine or whatever,
develops that very well but kind of gets hung up on it and in the background everything else that's going on hasn't changed into 1980.
I think just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to think about a situation.
The guy is going to make a phone call just like stop and think how he might make that.
Think about it for five minutes and then maybe show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in the first couple of seconds.
It's worth the effort, I don't think it radically changes the story but it does give it that finishing polish as it were at least in that sense.
I try to do this in all the stories and I find that readers like it.
From the people who write to me and the people that I meet,
one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader
who buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstore.
I suppose people who might be termed younger professional people in their late 20s, 30s, 40s in all manner of professions
not necessarily to do with the scientists, teachers, lawyers, doctors, so forth, who typically would say,
gee, I used to read science fiction when I was at college or when I was at university but I kind of grew out of it.
I can't relate to the way out galaxies like years away anymore or aliens running around with ray guns.
Today I have a family, a career, a mortgage, my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet.
But they seem to like stories that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now
and it kind of grabs them.
I say, well, this I can relate to, it's the world that I live in just stretched a little bit.
The connection is not broken, the economics and the politics have evolved and what I read in the papers, I can still see the connections.
And it could be the world my kids know of it and I like it.
And if it has that effect on that far vast market of readership then I'm perfectly happy to continue doing that
in addition to the reason that I enjoy the stories better myself for doing that.
I wouldn't be misreading and saying you're an optimistic person would I?
I think I am.
And notice your stories tend to be rather optimistic.
Sure, why not?
Good question, why not?
I think there's enough doom and gloom around.
I try and contribute something to counterbalance all that.
I think it's needed.
You probably would hold a great hope for the human potential then.
Oh, excuse me, I missed the question.
Okay, you probably would hold a great hope for the human potential.
Oh, I think it's unlimited.
It doesn't guarantee we'll use it correctly and wisely at all.
There's no guarantee of that but I have no doubt that the potential exists and the choice is entirely up to us.
And I think that in itself is grounds for optimism.
It means that we're not pawns that are pushed around by fate or magical, mystical forces that we have no control over our future.
I think that would be a very depressing thought.
I think it underlies a lot of the philosophies that we hear astounded.
Oh, excuse me to quit trying to write everything off as a futile.
I don't subscribe to this at all.
I think that in the same way that the individual future lies in his or her hands,
and I think they have infinite potential to build upon,
if they have the only resource that we're short of in some quarters,
is positive thinking and the right attitude of mind.
Nothing else.
And I think collectively the same is true.
I think that there is a human tendency to be too conscious of our failings and our faults and our mistakes,
which have happened.
It would be silly to deny that.
But I think by and large we've achieved some remarkable and wonderful things as well,
and continue to do so.
And I think when I look at the bottom line of the balance sheet,
I'm pretty proud to be a member of the human race.
Okay, we're just commenting on here.
I happen to agree with you.
Could you hold for just a second here?
We're going to shut the machine down.
Zero just said go ahead and continue.
He just stopped and I had just stopped the machine to find out what it was that he said.
That was sort of redundant on my part.
Okay, machines crank back up and.
Do this again?
We're rolling again.
Okay.
In your novel, Christ Upon a Time, you base the story around a device that can send messages back in time to itself 24 hours in the past.
Sure.
And then by that process just keep sending it back to itself and back to itself.
Uh huh.
I've been reading recently about several scientists who are speculating about real possibilities of time travel.
Yeah.
Was your novel, uh, that your novel really was written before those came out.
It's sort of prophetic in a way.
Maybe that's where they got it from.
Uh, well, I don't know whether it's prophetic or not.
I said, well, as is elaborated in the book itself, if something like that ever became a fact, there are some pretty interesting problems that are going to have to be solved.
And our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty interesting revisions.
So I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet saying, yes, it'll happen.
Um, maybe, I don't know.
I think history has shown that, uh, impossible or it'll never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context.
Uh, as far as I was concerned, it was just, uh, a fun basis for a story.
Certainly not an original one.
Although I did, I was trying, I don't suppose any of the things I've written about have been original in essence.
I'd try and approach them from hopefully fresh and different angles.
But for some time, for a number of years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice upon a time, I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a number of reasons.
Uh, firstly, I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes, once and for all, and answer them without top-outs, without convenient coincidences,
and without obliging characters who just happen to do the right thing to make everything come out the way the author said.
Uh, and secondly, I wanted to, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind of a conjurer's box,
described or described as whatever that you jump into and you jump out of and you're in some other time.
Uh, we seem too many conjurer's boxes and it seemed to me unrealistic, if I ever build a box like that,
and I thought it was going to take me to another time, I certainly would jump into it and press the button.
I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments first and none of that here I've ever seen to do this.
And it seemed to me reasonable to say if we're going to make the speculation of influencing the past,
it seemed to me to be reasonable to speculate that if we're going to make that assumption anyway,
that before we move structured objects and people back into another time, we probably learn how to inject energy first.
And if you can send energy back in time, you can obviously switch the energy on and off and modulate it and send information.
In other words, you can send messages to yourself if you like.
I wanted to, I didn't want it to be a million years or a billion years or some huge amount of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference.
How about a lab bench experiment, ten minutes?
Now you can just send a little signal back to yourself ten minutes ago and change what you've already done.
This is interesting, you're hard up against the paradoxes now.
You can't duck around them or duck them. You've got to answer the question, what happens?
The logic of the whole situation becomes absolutely, it drives you to the point of insanity trying to figure it out.
I found the only way to do it was to think in terms of the simplest possible lab bench experiment that you could devise
and strip away all the complications to just get the logic right and then elaborate it back in up to the level that would make a story interesting.
And the simplest situation that you can think of is a button and a lamp, when you push the button the lamp comes on.
Couldn't get much simpler than that.
The only different thing here is the lamp comes on ten seconds before you press the button.
Because the signal goes back in time.
So the question is obvious, what happens? I wait until the lamp comes on.
Ten seconds later it's time to press the button, I'm not going to press it.
Nobody could make me. I didn't want mystical forces compelling people to do something they didn't want to do.
I wanted to preserve human free will, so what happens? I don't press the button.
Conversely I can say, well, the lamp didn't come on, but I'm going to press the button anyway, just for the hell of it. What happens?
So those are two situations, one being the inverse of the other.
And if you can explain what happens, you can answer any time travel paradox because every one is an elaboration of one of those situations or the other.
And it's not good enough to, for example, to wait for the lamp to come on and you say,
not going to press the button and fold your arms and sit there.
And just as the time is up, the door opens and somebody stalls in and says, hey, what's this?
And presses the button.
That doesn't get you out of it because you're a scientist, you're going to repeat your experiment under conditions where that couldn't happen.
You lock the door and set it up again.
You go out of the room and have the computer press the button.
But eventually you would test it time and time and time again.
And if accidents happen that got you out of a mess the first time, you could eliminate them the next time.
And eventually you have to face up to that question, what happens?
That's what I wanted to do.
And the third thing I wanted to do was to tell a story in which the time machine itself and the staggering conceptual changes in physics and philosophy that are implied are relevant to the story that's being told there,
an integral part of it.
If you talk them away there wouldn't be any story.
I think in too many stories time machines are used like starships.
They're just a device, a vehicle to get some characters into an unusual environment and then tell a pretty routine story that would stole them from Greek mythology or European medieval history.
And the technology doesn't come into the story at all.
They could have gone on a Greyhound bus.
I didn't want to do that.
And so the story was about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had realized that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant, it meant that they could actually inject information into the past and change the past with all the questions that implies.
And being proceeded to test this phenomenon and obtain some very, very strange results.
And yet they're convinced that behind all this there is some consistent system of super logic that does make sense and they're trying to figure out the rules of it.
And of course there's an unspoken or unwritten invitation for the reader to participate.
Again, I suppose it's a kind of a detective story.
Not so much a who done it, but how is it done to see if the reader can figure out the rules before the characters did?
Yeah, it is something that I noticed when I was reading the novel is that there are no unresolved paradoxes in it.
You do sew them all up neatly before the end of the novel.
Well, that was one of the goals of writing the book.
Yeah.
And I think it worked because the people that seem to know what they're talking about and have commented will seem pretty satisfied.
So that made me pretty satisfied.
There are a couple of silly things in there which don't really affect the physics of the time machine.
There was a big fusion planned up in Scotland.
And I don't know why due to a lapse of concentration on my part in one chapter it had moved to a rather pilot Scotland.
We'll fix that when the book's next reprinted.
There was an eagle-eyed Scotsman wrote to me and picked that out.
It started off on the Solway Firth and ended up on the Murray Firth, or no the other way around.
I got it on the wrong Firth in one chapter.
Well, maybe for one of your future novels you'll have to explore matter transmitters.
Yeah, yeah, well, yeah, that's another possibility.
I did explore that in a short story I wrote called Assassin, which was in the Stella anthology series, Stella number four.
This was exploring the possibility of matter transmission and of course people.
You can instantly get somebody from here to there, but in fact what appears there is a copy of them.
So you've now got two of them.
If the other one decides to come back the same way you're getting rapidly multiplying problems, literally.
Stella Assassin was a story that played around with that thought.
I must have missed that one.
Since Stella four, it came out a couple of years ago.
You've written a sequel to the Inherit the Stars called The General Giants of Ganymede.
That's right.
Did you intend to follow the story in Inherit the Stars with a sequel or was it from Reader Demand or what?
A bit of both.
When I wrote Inherit the Stars I had three books in mind.
I had a trilogy in mind.
So I put the hooks in, although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself, it didn't leave the reader hanging.
It started and told and finished a story.
Nevertheless there were a couple of hooks in there that invited some questions, which were paved the way to a follow up book.
My thinking at the time was I'll go that far, but I won't write the second book until I have some feedback as to how the readers liked the first one.
I got a lot of mail and they all liked it and a lot of them said in their letters, will there be a follow up?
They picked out the hooks.
So I wrote The General Giants.
And they wanted another one and I did have a trilogy in mind when I wrote it.
And the third one in that series is now written.
It's called Giants Star and it will be, it's a July title, so it should start to appear in the bookstores around June.
The third and last, it won't be any more in that series.
So it ties up a few of the loose ends, tells another story, continues with the characters we met in the previous two books, both the Terrestrial and the Aeod characters, and introduces some new ones.
And I don't think there can be a fourth one because it really, I don't think there's any more to be said, it wraps it all up.
Alright, are you working on any new projects?
I'm working on the, as I say, Giants Star will be out in June, July.
And I'm currently working on the one after that, which I don't have a title for yet because I always think of the title Blast.
And I don't know when it'll be on sale because I don't know when I'll finish it.
Probably sometime this spring.
What type of story is it without giving away any of the plot detail?
Well, it's, how can we sum it up?
It's, it's, it's, it's promises, well, the background to the story is that we're in the second half of the next century.
And some decades previously, in other words, in about, about around the year 2020, a robot star probe was sent out.
Programmed to tour a number of stars and simply to search for habitable planets and generally explore.
Send down surface probes, atmospheric probes, things like that, radio everything back.
And the political situation on Earth was looking very, very grave at that time.
I am an optimist, but I can still invent all three scenarios for a story, though it's fiction after all.
Optimism may turn out to be unjustified yet, but, uh,
towards the closing years of this project, in other words, obviously you don't build a ship like that overnight.
And when it was well along the way towards being completed, it was modified to be capable of making people.
Let me quantify that, that's a strange thing to say.
We'll read a lot of stories about starships that go on long voyages that take maybe centuries,
and inevitably they've got frozen bodies or bodies in suspended animation or something like that.
But when you think about it, it seems rather an inefficient way to say, you know, they're not doing anything, the machines can fly the ship, the computers can get it there.
The people aren't doing anything about it except, you know, just lying there freezing.
So, uh, why not let the machines fly the ship and make the people when you get there?
If we look at the progress made in molecular biology and genetic engineering in the last couple of decades,
we already manufactured quite complex organic molecules to specifications such as drugs and certain anesthetics.
If we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to say you couldn't make a complete set of human DNA?
In other words, instead of sending bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space,
why not just store all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the computers
and create them when you have found a planet that the instruments say they could survive on?
And, you know, let's imagine for a sake of argument that ten light years away you found a planet.
Well, if the robot ship got there and sent back a signal saying, started the experiment, well, ten years later the signal gets to Earth.
And even if they responded instantly, the ship's been in orbit for twenty years doing nothing, just waiting for a reply.
Well, the ultimate test of whether or not a planet is inevitable is to set up a colony and try it.
So we could have used those twenty years.
So here is the interesting possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos that were created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots.
A machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the machines does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at all.
It could be quite a charming and amusing one.
And the interesting thoughts that the book starts to play with is, here is a race of kids that are being raised by some very rational, direct, down-to-earth end-to-earth.
Who don't double talk or deceive or have all these layers of human game-playing that we have to contend with.
And they're being raised completely without any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults with their prejudices and hatred and taboos.
And a lot of the other non-stances that make life so complicated in our society.
And also, I mean, they're not a primitive society.
They're a very high-technology society that they arrive with some of the most advanced equipment and technology ever devised.
Right?
Yeah.
While they were in orbit and growing up through infancy, the machines were down on the surface, preparing surface bases, manufacturing facilities and industries and so forth.
So, by the time they actually enter adolescence, the races, the generations I should say that follow thereafter, all of their material needs are provided by highly automated means.
In terms of their productivity relative to their numbers, everyone is a millionaire.
And let's imagine that a mission from Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is usually a 20-year voyage, maybe.
So we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people, virtually a space colony with engines.
With its government, its military, its church organizations, its commercial institutions.
The whole of society in miniature with its time-proved mechanisms for controlling and subordinating a population.
Which traditionally, a ruling elite through history has imposed itself by restricting the flow of wealth and by offering protection either from real or imagined threats.
But how do you control a race of millionaires who don't need your wealth and the idea of restricting anything has never occurred to them?
They're restricting the supply of anything. They don't need you to protect them from anybody.
And none of the tricks or the psychology or the scare tactics work.
So what happens when a race of machine-raised people eventually collides with a race of people-raised people?
And that's really what the story is all about.
Alright, let's hold for just a second. Crank the machine back up here.
Okay.
Shut the machine back up.
Okay, I'll go ahead and ask the question and then we'll just splice this into this show when we do it.
Okay.
In your novel, Two Faces of Tomorrow, you explore the future of machine intelligence.
How far away do you think we might be from intelligent computers?
I don't know that I have an answer to that.
Two Faces was not intended to be prophetic in any way.
Nothing that I write in the fictional sense is I simply sketch possibilities of what might be, not predictions of what will be.
Putting a time limit on it, it's an awkward thing to be asked to do.
I'm sort of thinking about this.
My mind is going back over the number of confident predictions that have been made in the past on various topics that proved disasterously wrong either one way or the other.
I see no reason in principle why artificial systems of some kind, not necessarily what we'd call computers.
In other words, electronics of some form inside a box of some form.
But simply man-made system should not in principle be capable of all of the feats that are performed by the human mind.
In other words, thinking in the sense that we normally use the word and all its connotations in everyday conversations.
We have a system already in existence, a physical system that can think the human brain itself.
We could turn the question around a little and say, if the human brain is a physical system that can think, is there any reason to suppose that some other...